Now, the theme of my discussion is
“Despite Changing Circumstances,
Always See the Big Picture.”
Perhaps you’ve heard the expression,
“He can’t see the forest for the trees.”
This is referring to a person
who is too involved
in the details of a problem
to see the situation as a whole.
Now, that’s a dangerous problem for anyone,
but especially one of Jehovah’s people.
No matter what the circumstances,
we want to always see the “big picture.”
The first sentence
in today’s Watchtower  comments says this:
“Philip the evangelizer
“provides a fine example
“of one who stayed focused on [the] ministry
despite changing circumstances.”
And for us, just like Philip,
the big picture is always Jehovah’s thinking
—to see Jehovah’s view of the situation.
Jehovah’s thinking, or Jehovah’s viewpoint,
is so lofty—isn’t it?—so elevated.
Open up to Isaiah, please,
chapter 55,
and notice
what is said here about the altitude
of Jehovah’s thinking.
Jehovah says in verse 9:
“For as the heavens
are higher than the earth,
“so my ways are higher than your ways
and my thoughts than your thoughts.”
And if you think about it, viewpoint
really does make a difference, doesn’t it?
It makes a huge difference.
For example, if you walk up
to the World Trade Center building
on the sidewalk and look up,
it’s overwhelming—intimidating.
On the other hand, if you fly over
the World Trade Center building
in an airplane and look out the window at it,
it looks like a matchstick
stuck in the ground.
Well, viewpoint makes a difference.
Here’s another illustration:
Imagine that you’re lost in a complex maze.
Now, overhead, though,
is a trusted friend in a helicopter.
Now, that friend could easily direct you
to safety, is that not true?
Well, in this illustration,
our trusted friend
with the elevated view is,
of course, Jehovah.
In fact,
while you’re still looking at this picture,
let me read to you, please, Jehovah’s words
at Isaiah 30:21—his promise.
He says: “And your own ears
will hear a word behind you saying,
“‘This is the way.
“‘Walk in it,’ in case you
should go to the right
or in case you should go to the left.”
So if we make
Jehovah’s thinking our thinking,
then Jehovah will safely guide us
through any situation.
But now, what makes it challenging
to always see the big picture?
Well, as we touched on
—changing circumstances.
First Corinthians 7:31:
“The scene of this world is changing.”
Similarly, we could say the scene
of our lives is constantly changing.
In fact, let’s talk
about some changing circumstances
that could come our way
before the end of this system
in which we want
to always see the big picture.
Now, one is a change of residence.
As we touched on, that happened to Philip.
He was forced out of Jerusalem
because of intense persecution.
He ended up in Samaria,
but he saw the big picture there.
He knew he didn’t have to be
in Jerusalem to preach.
He didn’t have to be
in Jerusalem to serve Jehovah.
He could do it in Samaria,
and he did so—powerfully.
Probably the most outstanding example
of a change of residence is Jesus.
He left his heavenly abode
of billions of years
to live on this little tiny earth.
But obviously, he always saw the big picture
by making Jehovah’s thinking his thinking.
Abraham and Sarah
were another excellent example
of a drastic change in residence.
Well, that may happen to us.
We may have a change of residence,
either by no choice of our own or by choice.
We may choose to move
and serve where the need is greater.
We may have to move
to care for family responsibilities.
I know of a Bethel couple
who served at Bethel almost 25 years.
They had to leave to care
for a father who had dementia,
but they continue to see the big picture.
They knew that you can preach,
you can go to meetings,
you can read God’s Word,
and you can serve Jehovah wherever you live.
Now, here’s another changing circumstance:
You develop chronic health problems,
perhaps problems that will only
be corrected by Jehovah’s new world.
Now, in this vein,
think for a moment about Job.
He was struck with cancerous boils
from the crown of his head
to the soles of his feet
—brought to within one inch of death.
He wished that he was dead.
And yet, he saw the big picture, didn’t he?
‘I’ve got to keep my integrity
to Jehovah no matter what.’
He even said at Job 27:5:
“Until I die,
I will not renounce my integrity.”
Now, he had no idea
that he would be restored to good health.
But he knew that if he kept his integrity,
he would be resurrected.
Jehovah would call him,
and he would answer from the grave.
Well, it’s the same with us.
We may develop chronic health problems.
We may even die
before the end of this system.
But if we keep our integrity,
such an individual will take a quick nap
and, from his perspective,
instantaneously open his eyes
in the new world
—if he keeps his integrity, like Job.
And if you think about this:
No matter how long
we have to suffer some illness,
it’s momentary
compared to the permanency
of perfect health in Jehovah’s new world.
That’s what 2 Corinthians 4:17 says:
“For though the tribulation
is momentary and light,
[yet] it works out for us a glory
that is . . . everlasting.”
So if we keep our eyes on the big picture
—maintain integrity—
we can trade a moment of pain
for an eternity of perfect health.
You could say, “An ounce of suffering
for gigatons of pleasure.”
Think of that: A gigaton
—a billion tons compared to an ounce.
Here’s another changing circumstance:
We encounter perceived injustice
in the congregation.
Now, you notice we said “perceived,”
because often things are not the way
we see them to be.
We can’t read hearts.
We don’t have all the facts.
Often our view is like trying
to look into a large house
through the front door
that’s cracked open one inch (2.5 cm).
We have a very limited view.
So seeing the big picture,
we’ll recognize
that we don’t have all the facts.
And seeing the big picture,
we’ll recognize who
does have all the facts—Jehovah.
Everything is “naked
and openly exposed” to him.
Jesus—Revelation 2:1 refers to him
as having “the seven stars
[the elders] in his right hand
and [walking about]
among the seven golden lampstands.”
So Jesus, the head of the congregation,
has the facts.
So once we’ve done what’s in our jurisdiction
—perhaps reporting the matter—
seeing the big picture,
we’ll leave it in the hands
of those who have all the facts,
confident that they
will take care of this matter.
If it truly is an injustice,
they will take care of it
in their time and their way.
Now, here’s another changing circumstance:
We come face-to-face with some temptation.
Now, in a case like this,
we want to be nothing like Eve.
She obviously didn’t see the big picture,
did she?
If she had, she would have realized,
‘This serpent has done nothing for me.
‘Jehovah has done everything for me.
‘In a contradictory situation,
who, obviously,
would be telling me the truth?’
Instead, we want to be like Jesus.
When he was tempted by the Devil,
he saw the big picture
—didn’t he?—
the issue of universal sovereignty.
So if we’re tempted to look at pornography,
listen to apostate ideas,
flirt with someone who’s not our mate
(just a few examples),
let’s pause, elevate our thinking,
make Jehovah’s thinking our thinking,
and let’s see the big picture.
And the big picture is that Satan
is trying to get the thin edge of a wedge
into our suit of armor.
Anything this world has to offer
cannot begin to equal the value
of our relationship with Jehovah
and our place in his new world.
We’ll also be able to fast-forward
if we see the big picture
and see the horrible consequences
of giving in to temptation.
Now, here’s one more changing circumstance:
We’re persecuted.
And this can go from ridicule
to being threatened with execution
or even being executed.
Think of David for just a moment.
He was ridiculed,
and he was threatened with death by Goliath.
But even though David saw how big he was,
David saw the big picture, didn’t he?
He saw how puny, how wimpy
Goliath was compared
to Jehovah, the Almighty.
So the big picture has to always include
the almighty God, Jehovah.
And again, we’ll be able to fast-forward
to see the horrible consequences
of compromising if we’re persecuted.
On the other hand,
we’ll see the wonderful blessings
if we keep our integrity.
We do not compromise.
In fact, even if we’re threatened with death
or we’re executed,
if we see the big picture, we’ll realize
that Satan has just handed us
a validated passport
right into the new world.
See, that is the big picture.
Well, we’ve talked
about seeing the big picture
when you have a change of residence,
your health deteriorates,
you encounter a perceived injustice,
you come face-to-face with temptation,
or you are persecuted.
And these are just a few examples.
It may not always be easy
to see the big picture
in challenging circumstances.
But the key is to make
Jehovah’s thinking our thinking
—pause, elevate our thinking,
view it from Jehovah’s standpoint.
The result will be protection
and blessings coming our way
and praise going Jehovah’s way.